blog/workspaces-grpc/index.md, before:

---
slug: workspaces-grpc
title: A full-fledged Rust architecture based on workspaces and gRPC
authors: [giuliano]
tags: [rust, grpc, distributed-systems]
date: 2025-01-28 # update date
image: ./diagram1.png
---

## Introduction

Welcome to the first issue of the **Nullnet Blog**!

:::info[About us]

We're a group of developers passionate about the Rust programming language and its ecosystem.<br>
We're in the process of building an open-source, Rust-based firewall management system that operates at different layers of the network stack.<br>
As we learn and experiment along the way, this blog aims to share our experiences and knowledge with the community — we hope you'll find our content useful and engaging.

:::

In this post, we'll go through a **client-server architecture based on Rust's workspaces and gRPC**.<br>
The architecture is designed to be **scalable**, **maintainable**, and **easy to extend**, making it a great starting point for your next project.

We ourselves at Nullnet are setting up a codebase with a structure similar to the one we'll describe here.

Too much introduction already, let's dive into the fun stuff!

## The problem

TODO: add a brief description of the problem we're trying to solve

For the sake of simplicity, in this article we're going to implement a calculator service that can perform basic arithmetic operations,
but the same concepts are applicable to arbitrarily complex systems. <br>

## Case study

Before starting with the actual code, let's define the skeleton for our calculator project.

<div align="center">
    <img src="diagram1.png" alt="Case study diagram"/>
</div>

As it's outlined in the diagram above, we want to create two different services:
- the `algebraic-server`, providing functionalities related to algebraic operations (e.g., factorials, exponents)
- the `geometric-server`, exposing utilities related to geometric operations (e.g., computation of shape areas)

Both services will internally use a shared set of basic arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) implemented in the `arithmetic-workspace` module.

Each of the two services will then be exposed to clients through a gRPC interface.

If you're not familiar with Rust's workspaces or gRPC, don't worry — we'll introduce them in the following.

In the next sections, we'll go through the high-level implementation of the `arithmetic-workspace`, the `algebraic-server`, the `geometric-server`, and the clients that will consume the services.

We don't want to overwhelm you with too much code, so we'll keep the snippets simple and focus on the core concepts of the architecture.

## Rust's workspaces: the `arithmetic-workspace`

A [workspace](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-03-cargo-workspaces.html) is a feature of Cargo — the Rust's package manager — that allows you to manage multiple packages that are part of the same project.<br>
Each package in a workspace is called a _member_ of the workspace and is built as a separate crate, but all members share the same `Cargo.lock` file and `target`folder.

The `arithmetic-workspace` from our toy project is a perfect example of a module that can benefit from being structured as a workspace,
since it needs to provide multiple operations to be shared across different services.

In our case, the `arithmetic-workspace` will contain the following members:
- `add`: provides a method to add two floating point numbers
- `subtract`: provides a method to subtract two floating point numbers
- `multiply`: provides a method to multiply two floating point numbers
- `divide`: provides a method to divide two floating point numbers

To define a workspace, we need to create a `Cargo.toml` file at the root of our project and list its components under the `members` key:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[workspace]
members = [ "add", "subtract", "multiply", "divide" ]
```

After that, creating the base structure for each member is as simple as running `cargo new <member-name> --lib` in the root of the workspace. <br>
This will create a new library crate with the given name inside the workspace.

In this case, the implementation of the libraries is trivial and will be omitted, as it only consists of a simple method to perform the corresponding operation.

Once the workspace is set up, we can move on to the implementation of the actual services.

## gRPC services: the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server`

[gRPC](https://grpc.io) is a modern high-performance, open-source Remote Procedure Call framework that allows you to define **services** and **message types** using [Protocol Buffers](https://protobuf.dev),
a language-agnostic mechanism to serialize structured data.<br>
It's a great choice for building distributed systems, as it provides a simple yet efficient and **type-safe** way to communicate between services.

Rust hasn't yet received official support for gRPC, but the [`tonic`](https://github.com/hyperium/tonic) project provides a feature-rich, production-ready implementation of gRPC for our beloved language.<br>
Let's include the needed dependencies in the `Cargo.toml` file of the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server`:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[dependencies]
tonic = { version = "0.12.3", features = ["tls", "tls-roots"] }
prost = "0.13.4"
tokio = { version = "1.42.0", features = ["rt-multi-thread"] }

[build-dependencies]
tonic-build = "0.12.3"
```

First of all, we need to define the **service interfaces** in a `.proto` file. <br>
For our toy project, we'll create two separate files (`algebraic.proto` and `geometric.proto`), each containing the service definition for the corresponding server.

Here's what the `algebraic.proto` file looks like to define the endpoint for computing the exponent of a number:

```proto title="proto/algebraic.proto"
syntax = "proto3";

package algebraic;

service Algebraic {
  // Exponent
  rpc Exponent (ExponentMessage) returns (FloatResponse);
  // Other methods...
}

message ExponentMessage {
  float base = 1;
  uint32 exponent = 2;
}

message FloatResponse {
  float value = 1;
}
```

The `geometric.proto` file is similar, but it defines methods and message types to compute areas of squares and circles.

Once the `.proto` files are defined, we can generate the Rust code for the services with the help of the `tonic-build` crate.<br>
To do so, we need to add a `build.rs` file to our servers:

```rust title="build.rs"
const ALGEBRAIC_PROTOBUF_PATH: &str = "./proto/algebraic.proto";
const PROTOBUF_DIR_PATH: &str = "./proto";

fn main() {
    tonic_build::configure()
        .out_dir("./src/proto")
        .compile_protos(&[ALGEBRAIC_PROTOBUF_PATH], &[PROTOBUF_DIR_PATH])
        .expect("Protobuf files generation failed");
}
```

The `build.rs` file will generate the Rust code for the services in the `src/proto` directory.

The next step is to implement the server logic for the services.<br>
The code generated by `tonic-build` provides a trait that we need to implement for the related service:
its implementation will contain the actual logic for each of the service methods.

Here's a snippet of the implementation of the `exponent` method provided by the  `Algebraic` service:

```rust
pub struct AlgebraicImpl;

#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Algebraic for AlgebraicImpl {
    async fn exponent(
        &self,
        request: Request<ExponentMessage>,
    ) -> Result<Response<FloatResponse>, Status> {
        let ExponentMessage { base, exponent } = request.into_inner();

        let mut res = 1.0;
        for _ in 0..exponent {
            res = multiply::multiply(res, base);
        }

        let response = FloatResponse { value: res };
        Ok(Response::new(response))
    }
}
```

As you can see, we're using the `multiply` function from the `arithmetic-workspace` to compute the exponent, so we also need to add the `multiply` library as a dependency in the `Cargo.toml` file of the server.

We then need to create a `main.rs` file in each server crate to start the server and bind it to a specific address.

Here's the `main.rs` file for the `algebraic-server`:

```rust title="main.rs"
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
    let addr = SocketAddr::from_str("127.0.0.1:50051").unwrap();
    tonic::transport::Server::builder()
        .add_service(AlgebraicServer::new(AlgebraicImpl))
        .serve(addr)
        .await
        .unwrap();
}
```

But wait... we're still missing a crucial part: the **clients**!<br> 
Even though the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server` are intended to act as service implementors, we're going to use the same repositories to also expose **facades** for their clients.<br>
This way, there is no need to include protobuf files in the clients' repositories, as they can use the same generated code from the servers.

What it means in practice is that our services will not only include a **binary target** to run the server, but also a **library** to be imported by clients to interact with the server itself.<br>
More specifically, clients will use the library code exposed from the servers to create a gRPC channel and call the server methods.

In the following it's reported part of the `lib.rs` file for the `algebraic-server`, which defines a gRPC interface for its clients:

```rust title="lib.rs"
#[derive(Clone)]
pub struct AlgebraicGrpcInterface {
    client: AlgebraicClient<Channel>,
}

impl AlgebraicGrpcInterface {
    pub async fn new(addr: &'static str, port: u16) -> Self {
        let channel = Channel::from_shared(format!("http://{addr}:{port}"))
            .unwrap()
            .connect()
            .await
            .unwrap();
        Self {
            client: AlgebraicClient::new(channel),
        }
    }

    pub async fn exponent(&mut self, message: ExponentMessage) -> Option<FloatResponse> {
        self.client
            .exponent(Request::new(message))
            .await
            .map(tonic::Response::into_inner)
            .ok()
    }
}
```

Here we focused on part of the `algebraic-server` implementation, but the `geometric-server` follows the same overall structure and principles.

## Clients: the `algebraic-client` and `geometric-client`

The **clients** are the final piece of the puzzle.<br>
They will use the gRPC interfaces exposed by the servers to perform remote procedure calls and consume the services.

For our toy project, we'll create two clients: one for the `algebraic-server` and one for the `geometric-server` —
we'll call them `algebraic-client` and `geometric-client`, respectively.

As previously mentioned, the clients will use the same generated gRPC code from the servers.<br>
For this reason, clients don't need to directly include `tonic`-related dependencies in their `Cargo.toml` file,
but only the library target from the server they're going to consume.

To make things a little more interesting, each client won't just hardcode calls to the server endpoints, 
but will **receive inputs from a file that is continuously monitored for changes**.

The `algebraic-client` will read its inputs from a file containing a list of exponentiation and factorization operations to perform and will call the server for each of them.<br>
Here is a sample input file to compute the mathematical operations `2^4` and `5!`:

```text
pow 2,4
factorial 5
```

In a similar fashion, the `geometric-client` will read its inputs from a file containing a list of area computation operations to perform and will invoke the server to compute them.<br>
In the following, a sample input file to compute the areas of a square with side length `3` and a circle with radius `2`:

```text
square 3
circle 2
```

As you can see, files have a peculiar format that depends on the kind of supported operations.<br>
Each client is in charge of **parsing** the input file and calling the appropriate server endpoint.<br>
We won't go into the details of the parsing implementation here, as it's not relevant to the core concepts of the architecture.

What's more relevant is the way the **clients interact seamlessly with the servers**:
they're able to call the server endpoints without having to worry about the underlying gRPC communication details. <br>
In fact, the clients will only interact indirectly with the gRPC layer through the facades exposed by the servers.

TODO: add a brief snippet of the client calls to the server

Furthermore, what's interesting to note is that, despite each client needs to implement a specific parsing logic,
both clients need a **shared functionality** that is the ability to **monitor the input file for changes**:
this is another sample use case for a shared library.

Following the same pattern we used for the servers, we can add a new member to our `arithmetic-workspace` to contain the shared functionality for the clients. <br>
Let's call this library `file_monitor` and refactor our workspace to include two different subfolders: one for the server-related libraries and one for the client-related ones.

The final structure of the workspace will look like this:

```text
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── client_libraries
│   └── file_monitor
├── server_libraries
│   ├── add
│   ├── subtract
│   ├── multiply
│   └── divide
└── target
```

Last but not least, here is the updated architecture diagram highlighting that also the clients are using a shared library from the workspace:

<div align="center">
    <img src="diagram2.png" alt="Case study diagram"/>
</div>

## Wrapping up

In this article, we've gone through the implementation of an architecture based on Rust's workspaces and gRPC.<br>
We've seen how to structure a project with multiple services using shared libraries from a workspace, how to define gRPC servers with `tonic` including facades for their own clients, and how to use Protocol Buffers to define service interfaces.

In case you're interested in taking a closer look at the source code, you can find the full implementation of the modules on our GitHub:
- [`arithmetic-workspace`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/arithmetic-workspace)
- [`algebraic-server`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/algebraic-server)
- [`geometric-server`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/geometric-server)
- [`algebraic-client`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/algebraic-client)
- [`geometric-client`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/geometric-client)

Stay tuned for the next blog post, with more insights about Rust, security, and distributed systems!

Commit message:

add snippet to show sample client-server interaction

blog/workspaces-grpc/index.md, after:

---
slug: workspaces-grpc
title: A full-fledged Rust architecture based on workspaces and gRPC
authors: [giuliano]
tags: [rust, grpc, distributed-systems]
date: 2025-01-28 # update date
image: ./diagram1.png
---

## Introduction

Welcome to the first issue of the **Nullnet Blog**!

:::info[About us]

We're a group of developers passionate about the Rust programming language and its ecosystem.<br>
We're in the process of building an open-source, Rust-based firewall management system that operates at different layers of the network stack.<br>
As we learn and experiment along the way, this blog aims to share our experiences and knowledge with the community — we hope you'll find our content useful and engaging.

:::

In this post, we'll go through a **client-server architecture based on Rust's workspaces and gRPC**.<br>
The architecture is designed to be **scalable**, **maintainable**, and **easy to extend**, making it a great starting point for your next project.

We ourselves at Nullnet are setting up a codebase with a structure similar to the one we'll describe here.

Too much introduction already, let's dive into the fun stuff!

## The problem

TODO: add a brief description of the problem we're trying to solve

For the sake of simplicity, in this article we're going to implement a calculator service that can perform basic arithmetic operations,
but the same concepts are applicable to arbitrarily complex systems. <br>

## Case study

Before starting with the actual code, let's define the skeleton for our calculator project.

<div align="center">
    <img src="diagram1.png" alt="Case study diagram"/>
</div>

As it's outlined in the diagram above, we want to create two different services:
- the `algebraic-server`, providing functionalities related to algebraic operations (e.g., factorials, exponents)
- the `geometric-server`, exposing utilities related to geometric operations (e.g., computation of shape areas)

Both services will internally use a shared set of basic arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) implemented in the `arithmetic-workspace` module.

Each of the two services will then be exposed to clients through a gRPC interface.

If you're not familiar with Rust's workspaces or gRPC, don't worry — we'll introduce them in the following.

In the next sections, we'll go through the high-level implementation of the `arithmetic-workspace`, the `algebraic-server`, the `geometric-server`, and the clients that will consume the services.

We don't want to overwhelm you with too much code, so we'll keep the snippets simple and focus on the core concepts of the architecture.

## Rust's workspaces: the `arithmetic-workspace`

A [workspace](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-03-cargo-workspaces.html) is a feature of Cargo — the Rust's package manager — that allows you to manage multiple packages that are part of the same project.<br>
Each package in a workspace is called a _member_ of the workspace and is built as a separate crate, but all members share the same `Cargo.lock` file and `target`folder.

The `arithmetic-workspace` from our toy project is a perfect example of a module that can benefit from being structured as a workspace,
since it needs to provide multiple operations to be shared across different services.

In our case, the `arithmetic-workspace` will contain the following members:
- `add`: provides a method to add two floating point numbers
- `subtract`: provides a method to subtract two floating point numbers
- `multiply`: provides a method to multiply two floating point numbers
- `divide`: provides a method to divide two floating point numbers

To define a workspace, we need to create a `Cargo.toml` file at the root of our project and list its components under the `members` key:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[workspace]
members = [ "add", "subtract", "multiply", "divide" ]
```

After that, creating the base structure for each member is as simple as running `cargo new <member-name> --lib` in the root of the workspace. <br>
This will create a new library crate with the given name inside the workspace.

In this case, the implementation of the libraries is trivial and will be omitted, as it only consists of a simple method to perform the corresponding operation.

Once the workspace is set up, we can move on to the implementation of the actual services.

## gRPC services: the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server`

[gRPC](https://grpc.io) is a modern high-performance, open-source Remote Procedure Call framework that allows you to define **services** and **message types** using [Protocol Buffers](https://protobuf.dev),
a language-agnostic mechanism to serialize structured data.<br>
It's a great choice for building distributed systems, as it provides a simple yet efficient and **type-safe** way to communicate between services.

Rust hasn't yet received official support for gRPC, but the [`tonic`](https://github.com/hyperium/tonic) project provides a feature-rich, production-ready implementation of gRPC for our beloved language.<br>
Let's include the needed dependencies in the `Cargo.toml` file of the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server`:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[dependencies]
tonic = { version = "0.12.3", features = ["tls", "tls-roots"] }
prost = "0.13.4"
tokio = { version = "1.42.0", features = ["rt-multi-thread"] }

[build-dependencies]
tonic-build = "0.12.3"
```

First of all, we need to define the **service interfaces** in a `.proto` file. <br>
For our toy project, we'll create two separate files (`algebraic.proto` and `geometric.proto`), each containing the service definition for the corresponding server.

Here's what the `algebraic.proto` file looks like to define the endpoint for computing the exponent of a number:

```proto title="proto/algebraic.proto"
syntax = "proto3";

package algebraic;

service Algebraic {
  // Exponent
  rpc Exponent (ExponentMessage) returns (FloatResponse);
  // Other methods...
}

message ExponentMessage {
  float base = 1;
  uint32 exponent = 2;
}

message FloatResponse {
  float value = 1;
}
```

The `geometric.proto` file is similar, but it defines methods and message types to compute areas of squares and circles.

Once the `.proto` files are defined, we can generate the Rust code for the services with the help of the `tonic-build` crate.<br>
To do so, we need to add a `build.rs` file to our servers:

```rust title="build.rs"
const ALGEBRAIC_PROTOBUF_PATH: &str = "./proto/algebraic.proto";
const PROTOBUF_DIR_PATH: &str = "./proto";

fn main() {
    tonic_build::configure()
        .out_dir("./src/proto")
        .compile_protos(&[ALGEBRAIC_PROTOBUF_PATH], &[PROTOBUF_DIR_PATH])
        .expect("Protobuf files generation failed");
}
```

The `build.rs` file will generate the Rust code for the services in the `src/proto` directory.

The next step is to implement the server logic for the services.<br>
The code generated by `tonic-build` provides a trait that we need to implement for the related service:
its implementation will contain the actual logic for each of the service methods.

Here's a snippet of the implementation of the `exponent` method provided by the  `Algebraic` service:

```rust
pub struct AlgebraicImpl;

#[tonic::async_trait]
impl Algebraic for AlgebraicImpl {
    async fn exponent(
        &self,
        request: Request<ExponentMessage>,
    ) -> Result<Response<FloatResponse>, Status> {
        let ExponentMessage { base, exponent } = request.into_inner();

        let mut res = 1.0;
        for _ in 0..exponent {
            res = multiply::multiply(res, base);
        }

        let response = FloatResponse { value: res };
        Ok(Response::new(response))
    }
}
```

As you can see, we're using the `multiply` function from the `arithmetic-workspace` to compute the exponent, so we also need to add the `multiply` library as a dependency in the `Cargo.toml` file of the server.

We then need to create a `main.rs` file in each server crate to start the server and bind it to a specific address.

Here's the `main.rs` file for the `algebraic-server`:

```rust title="main.rs"
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
    let addr = SocketAddr::from_str("127.0.0.1:50051").unwrap();
    tonic::transport::Server::builder()
        .add_service(AlgebraicServer::new(AlgebraicImpl))
        .serve(addr)
        .await
        .unwrap();
}
```

But wait... we're still missing a crucial part: the **clients**!<br> 
Even though the `algebraic-server` and `geometric-server` are intended to act as service implementors, we're going to use the same repositories to also expose **facades** for their clients.<br>
This way, there is no need to include protobuf files in the clients' repositories, as they can use the same generated code from the servers.

What it means in practice is that our services will not only include a **binary target** to run the server, but also a **library** to be imported by clients to interact with the server itself.<br>
More specifically, clients will use the library code exposed from the servers to create a gRPC channel and call the server methods.

In the following it's reported part of the `lib.rs` file for the `algebraic-server`, which defines a gRPC interface for its clients:

```rust title="lib.rs"
#[derive(Clone)]
pub struct AlgebraicGrpcInterface {
    client: AlgebraicClient<Channel>,
}

impl AlgebraicGrpcInterface {
    pub async fn new(addr: &'static str, port: u16) -> Self {
        let channel = Channel::from_shared(format!("http://{addr}:{port}"))
            .unwrap()
            .connect()
            .await
            .unwrap();
        Self {
            client: AlgebraicClient::new(channel),
        }
    }

    pub async fn exponent(&mut self, message: ExponentMessage) -> Option<FloatResponse> {
        self.client
            .exponent(Request::new(message))
            .await
            .map(tonic::Response::into_inner)
            .ok()
    }
}
```

Here we focused on part of the `algebraic-server` implementation, but the `geometric-server` follows the same overall structure and principles.

## Clients: the `algebraic-client` and `geometric-client`

The **clients** are the final piece of the puzzle.<br>
They will use the gRPC interfaces exposed by the servers to perform remote procedure calls and consume the services.

For our toy project, we'll create two clients: one for the `algebraic-server` and one for the `geometric-server` —
we'll call them `algebraic-client` and `geometric-client`, respectively.

As previously mentioned, the clients will use the same generated gRPC code from the servers.<br>
For this reason, clients don't need to directly include `tonic`-related dependencies in their `Cargo.toml` file,
but only the library target from the server they're going to consume.

To make things a little more interesting, each client won't just hardcode calls to the server endpoints, 
but will **receive inputs from a file that is continuously monitored for changes**.

The `algebraic-client` will read its inputs from a file containing a list of exponentiation and factorization operations to perform and will call the server for each of them.<br>
Here is a sample input file to compute the mathematical operations `2^4` and `5!`:

```text
pow 2,4
factorial 5
```

In a similar fashion, the `geometric-client` will read its inputs from a file containing a list of area computation operations to perform and will invoke the server to compute them.<br>
In the following, a sample input file to compute the areas of a square with side length `3` and a circle with radius `2`:

```text
square 3
circle 2
```

As you can see, files have a peculiar format that depends on the kind of supported operations.<br>
Each client is in charge of **parsing** the input file and calling the appropriate server endpoint.<br>
We won't go into the details of the parsing implementation here, as it's not relevant to the core concepts of the architecture.

What's more relevant is the way the **clients interact seamlessly with the servers**:
they're able to call the server endpoints without having to worry about the underlying gRPC communication details. <br>
In fact, the clients will only interact indirectly with the gRPC layer through the facades exposed by the servers.

```rust title="Sample client-server interaction"
async fn call_server_sample() {
    let mut facade = AlgebraicGrpcInterface::new("localhost", 50051).await;
    let message = ExponentMessage { base: 2.0, exponent: 4 };
    let response = facade.exponent(message).await.unwrap();
}
```

Furthermore, what's interesting to note is that, despite each client needs to implement a specific parsing logic,
both clients need a **shared functionality** that is the ability to **monitor the input file for changes**:
this is another sample use case for a shared library.

Following the same pattern we used for the servers, we can add a new member to our `arithmetic-workspace` to contain the shared functionality for the clients. <br>
Let's call this library `file_monitor` and refactor our workspace to include two different subfolders: one for the server-related libraries and one for the client-related ones.

The final structure of the workspace will look like this:

```text
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── client_libraries
│   └── file_monitor
├── server_libraries
│   ├── add
│   ├── subtract
│   ├── multiply
│   └── divide
└── target
```

Last but not least,
here is the updated architecture diagram highlighting that also the clients are now using a shared library from the workspace:

<div align="center">
    <img src="diagram2.png" alt="Case study diagram"/>
</div>

## Wrapping up

In this article, we've gone through the implementation of an architecture based on Rust's workspaces and gRPC.<br>
We've seen how to structure a project with multiple services using shared libraries from a workspace, how to define gRPC servers with `tonic` that include facades for their own clients, and how to use Protocol Buffers to define service interfaces.

:::tip[Source code]

In case you're interested in taking a closer look at the source code,
you can find the full implementation of the discussed modules on our GitHub:
- [`arithmetic-workspace`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/arithmetic-workspace)
- [`algebraic-server`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/algebraic-server)
- [`geometric-server`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/geometric-server)
- [`algebraic-client`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/algebraic-client)
- [`geometric-client`](https://github.com/NullNet-ai/geometric-client)

:::

Stay tuned for the next blog post, with more insights about Rust, security, and distributed systems!
